Hello and welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. In this
video, we will cover one more feature in the STP
toolkit, Loop Guard, which basically acts as an
extra line of defense against layer 2 loops. Now,
the entire point of spanning tree protocol
is to prevent loops, that’s why we use it,
so what role does Loop Guard play? Well,
that’s what we’ll cover in this video.
In the previous few videos we’ve covered
these four features of the STP toolkit:
PortFast, BPDU Guard, BPDU Filter, and Root
Guard. Now we’re moving on to Loop Guard,
which protects the network from loops by disabling
a port if it unexpectedly stops receiving BPDUs,
ensuring it does not mistakenly enter
the Forwarding state. There are a few
situations where this might happen, such as a
software bug on one switch that stops it from
sending BPDUs. But in this video we’ll look at
one specific scenario: a unidirectional link.
So, we’ve got these two switches, SW1 and SW2,
and let’s connect them together. Under normal
circumstances, this is a bidirectional link,
meaning SW1 can transmit data to SW2,
and SW2 can transmit data to SW1.
But a unidirectional link is a network link
where data transmission occurs in only one
direction. For example, SW1 can send frames
to SW2, but SW2 can’t send frames to SW1.
This is obviously not a desirable situation,
and is typically caused by a layer 1 issue,
some physical problem with the hardware preventing
data from flowing in one direction. For example,
damaged cables could cause this, or faulty
connectors or transceivers, such as the SFP,
small form-factor pluggable, transceivers used for
fiber optic connections. In fact, unidirectional
links are more common with fiber-optic
cables than copper UTP cables. Why is that?
Let’s see. As we covered back in the beginning
of the course, fiber-optic connections typically
use two separate fibers, as I’ve changed the
diagram above to show. The Tx, transmission,
side of SW1 connects to the Rx, reception,
side of SW2. And the Tx side of SW2 connects
to the Rx side of SW1. Although they are separate
fibers, these two fibers are considered one cable,
connecting one interface on SW1 to one interface
on SW2, and allowing both of them to send and
receive data. The problem is that if one fiber
is damaged, it can disrupt data flow in one
direction, while the other remains unaffected.
And on top of that, fiber-optic cables are simply
more vulnerable to physical damage than copper
UTP cables. If you bend a fiber cable too far,
you’ll hear a small snap, and then the
cable is dead: you won’t be able to use it.
Now, for a fiber-optic interface to be up/up,
both fibers must be connected and functional.
For example, look at this connection between
two switches. They’re connected by a fiber-optic
cable, and the two fibers are connected on both
sides, so the link lights are green. So, that’s
what a functional fiber-optic connection looks
like. If there is a problem with either fiber,
the devices should be able to detect it and
disable their interfaces. So, if you disconnect
or cut this fiber, SW1 and SW2 should detect it
and disable their interfaces. This doesn’t result
in a unidirectional link – the link is disabled
entirely. Let’s take a look at that connection
again. With one fiber disconnected, the link
lights are now off. And after damaging the fiber,
even if I connect it, the link lights remain
off. But not all physical problems preventing
communication will be detected. And if the
devices fail to detect the physical problem,
it could result in a unidirectional link. If there
is a problem on one of these fibers that prevents
data transmission, but the devices don’t detect
it, their interfaces will remain up/up, and now
we have a unidirectional link. SW1 can transmit
data to SW2, but data that SW2 transmits can’t
reach SW1. They both think the connection is up
and running, but actually it only works one way.
So, what’s the problem with a unidirectional
link? Before we cover Loop Guard, let’s see
the problem it solves. Loop Guard doesn’t prevent
unidirectional links, but it can protect against
the negative effect that a unidirectional link
has on STP. As you know by now, BPDUs originate
from the Root Bridge and are forwarded out of
designated ports like this, every 2 seconds. And
these BPDUs are how the switches share information
with each other to determine the STP topology;
which interfaces should be forwarding,
and which interfaces should be blocking.
In this network, SW3 G0/1 is a non-designated
blocking port because it receives superior
BPDUs from SW2. To keep the diagram
simple I didn’t include any details,
but this is either because SW2 has a superior
root cost or bridge ID compared to SW3.
But if the SW2-SW3 link becomes unidirectional
and SW2’s BPDUs can’t reach SW3, what will
happen? Let’s assume there’s a physical issue
that prevents SW2’s frames from reaching SW3,
but doesn’t cause the switches to actually
disable their G0/1 interfaces; the switches
don’t detect the underlying physical issue.
SW3, which no longer receives BPDUs from SW2,
will assume there is no more loop in the
LAN. After the max age timer expires,
SW3 G0/1 will become a Designated port
and start forwarding BPDUs to SW2. And
because SW3’s BPDUs are inferior to SW2’s,
SW2 simply ignores SW3’s BPDUs. So, SW2 G0/1
and SW3 G0/1 are both in the forwarding state,
meaning we have a loop from SW1 to SW3 to SW2.
Let’s see how that loop works. If SW1 receives a
broadcast frame on one of its other interfaces,
it will flood the frame toward SW2 and SW3. The
frame flooded to SW2 won’t loop because of the
unidirectional link; SW2’s frames can’t reach
SW3. But the frame flooded to SW3 will loop
around the three switches like this. Each switch
that receives it will flood it repeatedly. So,
that’s the problem with a unidirectional link in
a LAN using STP. SW3 G0/1 stops receiving BPDUs,
thinks it should become a designated
port and start forwarding frames,
and then causes a loop. It would be better
if the hardware issue caused the link to
go down entirely. In that case, SW2 and
SW3 would both disable their G0/1 ports,
and there would be no loop. But how
can we deal with a situation like this,
where a hardware issue causes a unidirectional
link? You guessed it: the answer is Loop Guard.
So finally let’s see how Loop Guard solves
this problem. As I said before, Loop Guard
doesn’t prevent physical unidirectional links,
but provides a mechanism to detect unidirectional
links and then prevent layer 2 loops. When a Loop
Guard-enabled port’s max age timer counts down to
0, it doesn’t become a designated port and start
transitioning to the forwarding state. Instead,
it enters the broken (loop inconsistent) state.
That probably sounds familiar. Like the broken
(root inconsistent) state triggered by a root
guard violation, this blocks the port. Note that,
in both cases, whether it’s Root Guard or Loop
Guard , the ports remains up/up. So the port isn’t
actually shut down, it’s just that STP blocks it.
So, let’s say Loop Guard is enabled on SW3 G0/1,
and the SW2-SW3 link is unidirectional, preventing
SW2’s frames from reaching SW3. The max age timer
on SW3 G0/1 starts counting down. Normally, when
it reaches 0, it will become a designated port
and start transitioning to the forwarding
state. But when Loop Guard is enabled,
it enters the broken state, preventing a layer
2 loop from occurring. And like Root Guard,
recovery is automatic. If the physical issue is
solved and the broken port starts receiving BPDUs
again, it will be automatically re-enabled.
So, how can we configure Loop Guard? Like
the other features in the STP toolkit, the
actual configurations are simple. It can be
enabled in two ways. The first is per-port,
with SPANNING-TREE GUARD LOOP in interface
config mode. The second is by default in global
config mode with SPANNING-TREE LOOPGUARD DEFAULT.
This enables Loop Guard on all ports by default.
And then you can use SPANNING-TREE GUARD NONE in
interface config mode to disable it on specific
ports if needed. Loop Guard should typically be
activated on any ports that aren’t designated:
root and non-designated ports. In other words,
ports that are supposed to receive
BPDUs from designated ports. Then,
if they stop receiving BPDUs, Loop Guard
will disable them to prevent loops.
Now let’s take a look at Loop Guard in
the CLI. I enabled Loop Guard on SW3’s
G0/1 port with SPANNING-TREE GUARD LOOP. In the
output of SHOW SPANNING-TREE INTERFACE DETAIL,
it says “Loop guard is enabled
on the port”. So, that’s it;
it just takes that one command
to enable Loop Guard on a port.
But before we see it in action, let’s also see
how it looks when you enable it by default. So,
this time, instead of enabling it in interface
config mode, I used SPANNING-TREE LOOPGUARD
DEFAULT to enable it in global config mode. Then,
the output of this command is basically the same,
but it says “by default” at the end. Okay, now
let’s see what happens when Loop Guard blocks a
port. Currently, all links are operational
and SW3 G0/1 is receiving BPDUs from SW2.
But what if the link connecting
them becomes unidirectional? Well,
this message is shown in the CLI: Loop guard
blocking port GigabitEthernet0/1. And in the
output of SHOW SPANNING-TREE, G0/1’s status
is BKN, and it also says LOOP_Inc. As you
probably guessed, BKN means broken, and
LOOP_Inc means Loop Inconsistent. The port
is blocked because it stopped receiving
BPDUs. Maybe there’s a sharp bend in one
of the fibers that degraded the signal,
preventing SW2’s BPDUs from reaching SW3.
But then, perhaps someone adjusts the cable and
the data starts flowing again, and Loop guard
automatically unblocks the port because it starts
receiving BPDUs again from SW2. As you can see
here, G0/1’s status is now blocking, not broken,
and it doesn’t say Loop Inconsistent anymore. So,
like Root Guard, Loop Guard automatically
re-enables a port if the problem is fixed;
you don’t have to issue any
commands to re-enable the port.
I’ve added another switch to this LAN,
one that is not your switch; you don’t
have direct control over its configuration.
Before we wrap up this video, let me point out
something about Loop Guard and Root Guard.
These two features are mutually exclusive,
and by that, I mean they can’t be enabled on
the same port at the same time. And that’s
because they basically serve opposite purposes.
Root Guard is meant to prevent designated ports
from becoming root ports. If a Root-Guard enabled
designated port starts receiving superior BPDUs,
it will be blocked. And Loop Guard is meant to
prevent Non-Designated or Root ports from becoming
Designated ports. If a Loop Guard-enabled port
stops receiving BPDUs, it will be blocked. So,
looking at SW3 in the network above,
G0/0 and G0/1 should use Loop Guard,
and G0/2 should use Root Guard. It wouldn’t make
sense to configure the opposite. For example, SW3
G0/0 and G0/1 are supposed to receive BPDUs from
SW1 and SW2. If you configure Root Guard on them,
they’ll both be blocked, cutting off communication
in the LAN. Okay, so just remember that you can’t
enable both on an interface at the same time.
How does that affect the configurations? If Loop
Guard is configured on a port, with SPANNING-TREE
GUARD LOOP, and you then configure Root Guard,
with SPANNING-TREE GUARD ROOT, Loop Guard will
be disabled on the port. The Root Guard command
will replace it. And vice versa. If Root Guard
is enabled on a port and you then configure Loop
Guard, Root Guard will be disabled. And if Loop
Guard is enabled by default, in global config
mode, and you then configure Root Guard on a
port, Loop Guard will be disabled on the port.
In other words, the more specific configuration
takes effect. The interface command applies only
to one interface, it's more specific than the
global command, so the interface command takes
effect. This is true for many features in IOS. For
example, it’s the same for PortFast, BPDU Guard,
and BPDU Filter. If you enable PortFast
by default in global config mode, but then
disable it on a specific interface, the interface
command takes effect. Remember that about IOS
commands. Usually, the more specific command
takes effect over the less specific command.
Okay let’s summarize Loop Guard. Its purpose
is to protect the network by blocking a port
if it unexpectedly stops receiving BPDUs. This
could happen if, for example, there is a software
bug preventing a switch from sending BPDUs. Or if
there is a hardware issue causing a unidirectional
link. A unidirectional link is a network link
where data transmission occurs in only one
direction. A normal link should be bidirectional,
allowing communication in both directions. A
unidirectional link is typically caused by layer
1 issues on fiber-optic cables; that’s the most
common scenario. If the connected devices don’t
detect the issue and disable their interfaces,
it can result in a unidirectional link. This
prevents BPDUs from reaching the neighboring
switch. And if a root or non-designated port stops
receiving BPDUs, it will become a designated port,
potentially causing a layer 2 loop. Loop
Guard’s role is to protect against this. If
a Loop Guard-enabled port stops receiving BPDUs,
it enters the broken “loop inconsistent” state,
effectively disabling the port. But if it starts
receiving BPDUs again, it will be automatically
re-enabled. There are two ways to configure it.
The first is per-port, with SPANNING-TREE GUARD
LOOP in interface config mode. The second is by
default, with SPANNING-TREE LOOPGUARD DEFAULT
in global config mode. This enables it on all
ports, but you can then use SPANNING-TREE GUARD
NONE to disable it on specific ports if needed.
It’s similar to enabling PortFast, BPDU Guard,
or BPDU Filter by default and then disabling them
on individual ports. Final point: Loop Guard and
Root Guard are mutually exclusive, so they can’t
be active on the same port at the same time. So,
if Loop Guard is configured on a port and you then
configure Root Guard, Loop Guard will be disabled,
and vice versa. And if Loop Guard is enabled by
default and you configure root guard on a port,
Loop Guard will be disabled on the port. Only
one can be active at a time on each port. Okay,
that’s all for this video on Loop Guard. I
hope it was helpful. Thanks for watching.